cotton-usb-host/README.md, before:

[![CI status](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/pdh11/cotton/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=SMSZEPGRHA)](https://codecov.io/gh/pdh11/cotton)
[![dependency status](https://deps.rs/repo/github/pdh11/cotton/status.svg)](https://deps.rs/repo/github/pdh11/cotton)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/cotton-usb-host)](https://crates.io/crates/cotton-usb-host)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/d/cotton-usb-host)](https://crates.io/crates/cotton-usb-host)
[![docs.rs](https://img.shields.io/docsrs/cotton-usb-host)](https://docs.rs/cotton-usb-host/latest/cotton_usb_host/)
[![License: CC0-1.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC0_1.0-lightgrey.svg)](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)

# cotton-usb-host

Part of the [Cotton](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton) project.

## A no-std, no-alloc USB host stack for embedded devices

This crate enables the USB host-controller peripheral on the RP2040
microcontroller, allowing USB devices (memory sticks, keyboards, hubs,
etc.) to be connected directly to the RP2040 and controlled by it.

USB operation is _asynchronous_ and so this crate is suited for use
with embedded asynchronous executors such as
[RTIC&nbsp;2](https://rtic.rs/2/book/en/) and
[Embassy](https://embassy.dev).

Includes:

 - control, interrupt, and bulk endpoint support;
 - hub support;
 - hot-plug, and hot-unplug, including of hubs.

Currently supports:

 - RP2040 (USB 1.1 host)[^1]

System-tests and examples:

 - [rp2040-usb-msc](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/blob/main/cross/rp2040-w5500-rtic2/src/bin/rp2040-usb-msc.rs):
   identifying and driving mass-storage class devices (e.g., USB flash
   drives); **WARNING** this _writes_ to the USB drive, don't use one with
   data on that you want to keep;
 - [rp2040-usb-otge100](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/blob/main/cross/rp2040-w5500-rtic2/src/bin/rp2040-usb-otge100.rs):
   identifying (not yet really "driving") a Plugable USB2-OTGE100
   Ethernet adaptor (based on ASIX AX88772).

Limitations:

 - maximum of 31 devices total (including hubs);
 - maximum of 15 hubs;
 - maximum of 15 ports on any one hub[^2];
 - maximum of 256 bytes of configuration descriptors;
 - isochronous endpoints not yet implemented;
 - supports Low Speed (1.5Mbits/s) and Full Speed (12Mbits/s)
   operation only -- not High Speed (480Mbits/s) or above.

[^1]: The documentation describes this as "USB&nbsp;2.0 LS and FS" (1.5 and
12Mbits/s), but as the _only_ changes in USB&nbsp;2.0 compared to 1.1
were related to the addition of HS (480Mbits/s), it seems more honest
to describe it as USB&nbsp;1.1.

[^2]: USB&nbsp;3.0 explicitly limits hubs to 15 downstream ports;
USB&nbsp;2.0 and earlier did not, but even for USB&nbsp;2.0 such wide
hubs are either very rare or, quite possibly, non-existent. Most
freestanding hubs which _appear_ to have more than about 7 downstream
ports, are in fact multiple hubs in a trenchcoat.

Library documentation is [on
docs.rs](https://docs.rs/cotton-usb-host/latest/cotton_usb-host/).

## Using cotton-usb-host with a Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico

This crate configures the Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico's USB peripheral for
USB host mode _only_, and not USB device mode. So before running your
code, make sure that the USB connector on your Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico
is plugged into a USB device, and not into another USB host such as a
laptop[^3]. (You can still use a SWD connection via the 3-pin debug
connector to program and debug your Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico -- just not
the USB connection.)

If your Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico is itself powered by USB (perhaps via a
Pico Debug Probe), then it will not have enough power to reliably
supply USB power to downstream devices unless you power your Pico's
VUSB/GND pins from a separate 5V power supply &mdash; and perhaps not
even then. For best results with multiple devices, you should use a
_powered_ hub. (Powered hubs with micro-USB plugs, compatible with the
Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico in host mode, are often sold as "[OTG
hubs](https://www.amazon.co.uk/AuviPal-Adapter-Playstation-Classic-Raspberry-Black/dp/B083WML1XB/)".)

The crate is split between a generic (hardware-agnostic) `usb_bus::UsbBus`
class, and a host-controller driver specific to the RP2040. So the
minimal code example would involve:

 - creating a `UsbShared` object, making sure it's shared between the
   software tasks and the hardware interrupt handler;
 - arranging that the `USBCTRL_IRQ` interrupt handler calls `UsbShared::on_irq()`;
 - creating a `UsbStatics` object, which needn't be shared, but must
   be `&'static` &mdash; for instance, by using the `static-cell` crate;
 - constructing a `host::rp2040::Rp2040HostController` from the UsbShared,
   the UsbStatics, and the USB register banks from `rp2040-pac`;
 - constructing a `UsbBus` from the host-controller driver;
 - obtaining a stream of device-status events from
   `UsbBus::device_events()` &mdash; or, alternatively,
   `UsbBus::device_events_no_hubs()` for smaller code-size if
   supporting USB hubs isn't required;
 - waiting on the stream until it produces a `DeviceEvent::Connect`
   indicating that the device has been detected;
 - using APIs such as `UsbBus::control_transfer` to read descriptors,
   `UsbBus::configure` to configure the device appropriately, and
   `UsbBus::interrupt_endpoint` to read data from the device.

A complete example for RP2040 is at
   <https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/blob/main/cross/rp2040-w5500-rtic2/src/bin/rp2040-usb-msc.rs>;
   **WARNING** this _writes_ to the USB drive, don't use one with data
   on that you want to keep.

[^3]: The Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico (and the W5500-EVB-Pico for that
matter) have USB Micro-B receptacles (sockets), capable of receiving
Micro-B plugs only. Because they are capable of both USB device and
USB host, they _should_ arguably have had USB Micro-AB receptacles,
capable of receiving both Micro-A (rectangular) and Micro-B
(trapezium) plugs. But USB cables and adaptors with Micro-B plugs for
their _host_ side connection (instead of Micro-A which it [should
technically be](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB_On-The-Go)) are
common. Both ST and Renesas devboards get this right: they have Micro-AB
receptacles (though the very newest ST ones have type-C instead).

## Writing drivers for USB devices

This crate includes an example of identifying and communicating with
a Plugable USB2-OTGE100 Ethernet adaptor based on the ASIX&nbsp;AX88772
chip. A more complete example driver, for USB mass-storage class devices,
is in the cotton-usb-host-msc crate.

Once your code has successfully created the `UsbBus` object and has
called `UsbBus::device_events()`, it will receive `DeviceInfo` objects
which allow your code to identify relevant devices either by class
code (for generic class drivers such as mass-storage or HID) or by VID
and PID (for device-specific drivers).

## Writing drivers for alternative host controllers

The `UsbBus` code _should_ be generic enough to be usable with other
microcontrollers' USB host peripherals. You'll need to implement the
`host_controller::HostController` trait, which encapsulates all the
actual hardware interaction. Typically such host controllers have a
smallish, fixed number of "pipes" (actively-used endpoints) which can
be used simultaneously; you might find `async_pool::Pool`, as used by
the RP2040 host-controller driver, to be a convenient way of
allocating those pipes as required.

The RP2040 support is in this repo to provide a convenient worked example;
specific host-controller support for other microcontrollers probably
belongs in those microcontrollers' HAL crates.

## TODO

TODO before merge

 - [x] Hub state machine
 - [x] Unit tests
 - [x] Interlocking to avoid contending on pipe 0
 - [x] Rename types to wire
 - [x] Introduce delay to process_hub_packet and do away with currently_resetting
 - [ ] Remove from HubEventStream on disconnect
 - [x] Move all tests to src/tests

TODO before 0.1.0:

 - [x] System test
 - [x] Allocate endpoints from device object?
 - [x] UnconfiguredDevice/Device?
 - [x] Bulk in/out
 - [x] Enough configuration descriptor smarts to recognise MSC when we see it
 - [x] More of MSC -- at the very least, detect DASD
 - [ ] Max packet size for bulk endpoints
 - [x] doc-comments
 - [x] At least one real example (MSC? HID?)
 - [ ] Review register usage for contention (buff_status?)
 - [ ] STM32?

TODO later:

 - [ ] Non-async version?
 - [ ] rp-pac vs rp2040-pac?
 - [ ] More microcontrollers

Commit message:

Add RP235x support and more (see README)
Signed-off-by: Iulian Alexa <116089722+iulianalexa@users.noreply.github.com>

cotton-usb-host/README.md, after:

[![CI status](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/pdh11/cotton/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=SMSZEPGRHA)](https://codecov.io/gh/pdh11/cotton)
[![dependency status](https://deps.rs/repo/github/pdh11/cotton/status.svg)](https://deps.rs/repo/github/pdh11/cotton)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/cotton-usb-host)](https://crates.io/crates/cotton-usb-host)
[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/d/cotton-usb-host)](https://crates.io/crates/cotton-usb-host)
[![docs.rs](https://img.shields.io/docsrs/cotton-usb-host)](https://docs.rs/cotton-usb-host/latest/cotton_usb_host/)
[![License: CC0-1.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC0_1.0-lightgrey.svg)](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)

# Fork

This is a fork.

It implements the host controller for RP235x, using a patched version of [rp235x-pac](https://github.com/iulianalexa/rp235x-pac).

Some additional changes were made, including:
- Turned `UsbBus::interrupt_endpoint_in` into an async function.
  - Before this, it took a stream future and flattened it into a stream. This was an opaque type that was impossible to store for later use in embedded situations.
- `UsbBus::interrupt_endpoint_in` now needs an additional parameter, a reference to the `HubState`
  - Why...? Because:
- Added support for LS (Low Speed) devices running through FS (Full Speed) hubs!
  - Previously, LS devices worked as a root device, but connecting them through a FS hub would result in a timeout error.
  - Before this, I did not have much knowledge on the USB spec.
  - After some tests (figured out that it is not a hardware issue, as TinyUSB works fine, and also that it must be a speed issue, because FS devices can be detected through the hub), debugging, and reading through the [RP235x Datasheet](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/rp2350/rp2350-datasheet.pdf), I found that in such situations a special preamble must be sent!
    - This preamble is sent automatically by the USB controller when setting the `INTEP_PREAMBLE` bit in the `ADDR_ENDP` register of each relevant interrupt endpoint (see page 1158), as well as the `PREAMBLE_EN` bit in the `SIE_CTRL` register every time communication happens to a relevant device (see page 1160).
      - These bits must be unset in all other scenarios! Therefore, at all times it is necessary to know which devices need a preamble.
      - Also see the TinyUSB implementation: [here](https://github.com/hathach/tinyusb/blob/8f077f9295838d6a7e7a5151cb46605df14a630d/src/portable/raspberrypi/rp2040/hcd_rp2040.c#L361) and [here](https://github.com/hathach/tinyusb/blob/8f077f9295838d6a7e7a5151cb46605df14a630d/src/portable/raspberrypi/rp2040/hcd_rp2040.c#L581).
      
Because of these changes, unit tests as well as the RP2040 host controller implementation are now broken. Bringing them back should not be very difficult though.

# cotton-usb-host

Part of the [Cotton](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton) project.

## A no-std, no-alloc USB host stack for embedded devices

This crate enables the USB host-controller peripheral on the RP2040
microcontroller, allowing USB devices (memory sticks, keyboards, hubs,
etc.) to be connected directly to the RP2040 and controlled by it.

USB operation is _asynchronous_ and so this crate is suited for use
with embedded asynchronous executors such as
[RTIC&nbsp;2](https://rtic.rs/2/book/en/) and
[Embassy](https://embassy.dev).

Includes:

 - control, interrupt, and bulk endpoint support;
 - hub support;
 - hot-plug, and hot-unplug, including of hubs.

Currently supports:

 - RP2040 (USB 1.1 host)[^1]

System-tests and examples:

 - [rp2040-usb-msc](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/blob/main/cross/rp2040-w5500-rtic2/src/bin/rp2040-usb-msc.rs):
   identifying and driving mass-storage class devices (e.g., USB flash
   drives); **WARNING** this _writes_ to the USB drive, don't use one with
   data on that you want to keep;
 - [rp2040-usb-otge100](https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/blob/main/cross/rp2040-w5500-rtic2/src/bin/rp2040-usb-otge100.rs):
   identifying (not yet really "driving") a Plugable USB2-OTGE100
   Ethernet adaptor (based on ASIX AX88772).

Limitations:

 - maximum of 31 devices total (including hubs);
 - maximum of 15 hubs;
 - maximum of 15 ports on any one hub[^2];
 - maximum of 256 bytes of configuration descriptors;
 - isochronous endpoints not yet implemented;
 - supports Low Speed (1.5Mbits/s) and Full Speed (12Mbits/s)
   operation only -- not High Speed (480Mbits/s) or above.

[^1]: The documentation describes this as "USB&nbsp;2.0 LS and FS" (1.5 and
12Mbits/s), but as the _only_ changes in USB&nbsp;2.0 compared to 1.1
were related to the addition of HS (480Mbits/s), it seems more honest
to describe it as USB&nbsp;1.1.

[^2]: USB&nbsp;3.0 explicitly limits hubs to 15 downstream ports;
USB&nbsp;2.0 and earlier did not, but even for USB&nbsp;2.0 such wide
hubs are either very rare or, quite possibly, non-existent. Most
freestanding hubs which _appear_ to have more than about 7 downstream
ports, are in fact multiple hubs in a trenchcoat.

Library documentation is [on
docs.rs](https://docs.rs/cotton-usb-host/latest/cotton_usb-host/).

## Using cotton-usb-host with a Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico

This crate configures the Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico's USB peripheral for
USB host mode _only_, and not USB device mode. So before running your
code, make sure that the USB connector on your Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico
is plugged into a USB device, and not into another USB host such as a
laptop[^3]. (You can still use a SWD connection via the 3-pin debug
connector to program and debug your Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico -- just not
the USB connection.)

If your Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico is itself powered by USB (perhaps via a
Pico Debug Probe), then it will not have enough power to reliably
supply USB power to downstream devices unless you power your Pico's
VUSB/GND pins from a separate 5V power supply &mdash; and perhaps not
even then. For best results with multiple devices, you should use a
_powered_ hub. (Powered hubs with micro-USB plugs, compatible with the
Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico in host mode, are often sold as "[OTG
hubs](https://www.amazon.co.uk/AuviPal-Adapter-Playstation-Classic-Raspberry-Black/dp/B083WML1XB/)".)

The crate is split between a generic (hardware-agnostic) `usb_bus::UsbBus`
class, and a host-controller driver specific to the RP2040. So the
minimal code example would involve:

 - creating a `UsbShared` object, making sure it's shared between the
   software tasks and the hardware interrupt handler;
 - arranging that the `USBCTRL_IRQ` interrupt handler calls `UsbShared::on_irq()`;
 - creating a `UsbStatics` object, which needn't be shared, but must
   be `&'static` &mdash; for instance, by using the `static-cell` crate;
 - constructing a `host::rp2040::Rp2040HostController` from the UsbShared,
   the UsbStatics, and the USB register banks from `rp2040-pac`;
 - constructing a `UsbBus` from the host-controller driver;
 - obtaining a stream of device-status events from
   `UsbBus::device_events()` &mdash; or, alternatively,
   `UsbBus::device_events_no_hubs()` for smaller code-size if
   supporting USB hubs isn't required;
 - waiting on the stream until it produces a `DeviceEvent::Connect`
   indicating that the device has been detected;
 - using APIs such as `UsbBus::control_transfer` to read descriptors,
   `UsbBus::configure` to configure the device appropriately, and
   `UsbBus::interrupt_endpoint` to read data from the device.

A complete example for RP2040 is at
   <https://github.com/pdh11/cotton/blob/main/cross/rp2040-w5500-rtic2/src/bin/rp2040-usb-msc.rs>;
   **WARNING** this _writes_ to the USB drive, don't use one with data
   on that you want to keep.

[^3]: The Raspberry&nbsp;Pi Pico (and the W5500-EVB-Pico for that
matter) have USB Micro-B receptacles (sockets), capable of receiving
Micro-B plugs only. Because they are capable of both USB device and
USB host, they _should_ arguably have had USB Micro-AB receptacles,
capable of receiving both Micro-A (rectangular) and Micro-B
(trapezium) plugs. But USB cables and adaptors with Micro-B plugs for
their _host_ side connection (instead of Micro-A which it [should
technically be](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB_On-The-Go)) are
common. Both ST and Renesas devboards get this right: they have Micro-AB
receptacles (though the very newest ST ones have type-C instead).

## Writing drivers for USB devices

This crate includes an example of identifying and communicating with
a Plugable USB2-OTGE100 Ethernet adaptor based on the ASIX&nbsp;AX88772
chip. A more complete example driver, for USB mass-storage class devices,
is in the cotton-usb-host-msc crate.

Once your code has successfully created the `UsbBus` object and has
called `UsbBus::device_events()`, it will receive `DeviceInfo` objects
which allow your code to identify relevant devices either by class
code (for generic class drivers such as mass-storage or HID) or by VID
and PID (for device-specific drivers).

## Writing drivers for alternative host controllers

The `UsbBus` code _should_ be generic enough to be usable with other
microcontrollers' USB host peripherals. You'll need to implement the
`host_controller::HostController` trait, which encapsulates all the
actual hardware interaction. Typically such host controllers have a
smallish, fixed number of "pipes" (actively-used endpoints) which can
be used simultaneously; you might find `async_pool::Pool`, as used by
the RP2040 host-controller driver, to be a convenient way of
allocating those pipes as required.

The RP2040 support is in this repo to provide a convenient worked example;
specific host-controller support for other microcontrollers probably
belongs in those microcontrollers' HAL crates.

## TODO

TODO before merge

 - [x] Hub state machine
 - [x] Unit tests
 - [x] Interlocking to avoid contending on pipe 0
 - [x] Rename types to wire
 - [x] Introduce delay to process_hub_packet and do away with currently_resetting
 - [ ] Remove from HubEventStream on disconnect
 - [x] Move all tests to src/tests

TODO before 0.1.0:

 - [x] System test
 - [x] Allocate endpoints from device object?
 - [x] UnconfiguredDevice/Device?
 - [x] Bulk in/out
 - [x] Enough configuration descriptor smarts to recognise MSC when we see it
 - [x] More of MSC -- at the very least, detect DASD
 - [ ] Max packet size for bulk endpoints
 - [x] doc-comments
 - [x] At least one real example (MSC? HID?)
 - [ ] Review register usage for contention (buff_status?)
 - [ ] STM32?

TODO later:

 - [ ] Non-async version?
 - [ ] rp-pac vs rp2040-pac?
 - [ ] More microcontrollers
